DOCS-5279-xml-module-fix-sample-kt (#1448)
mulesoft/docs-connectors: xml/1.3/modules/ROOT/pages/xml-schema-validation.adoc

> = Validate Documents against an XSD Schema with the XML Module - Mule 4

Reviewer: ```suggestion
= Validate Documents Against an XSD Schema with the XML Module - Mule 4
```
OR
```suggestion
= Use the XML Module to Validate Documents Against an XSD Schema - Mule 4
```

:page-aliases: connectors::xml/xml-schema-validation.adoc

> The XML module *Validate schema* operation validates that the input content is compliant with a given XSD schema. The operation supports referencing many schemas using a `,` comma as a separator that includes each other schema.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The XML module *Validate schema* operation validates that the input content is compliant with a given XSD schema. The operation supports referencing many schemas, using a comma (`,`) as a separator.
```

By default, this operation looks for the input document at the message payload level, but you can supply your own input as well.

> Note that you can use the *Validate schema* operation inside the Validation module *All* scope.

Reviewer: The style ref guides us to use init. cap. for scope names (like module names); is this bold because you are quoting a UI element?

== Configure the Validation Schema Operation in Studio

> In the following example, you validate XML schemas that contains the script of the play Othello by William Shakespeare:

Reviewer: schemas that contain 
or
a schema that contains

Reviewer: I wonder about the advisability of using a culturally specific example text here. One might say that Shakespeare is international, and yet his writings are specific to the body of English literature, and we always give English examples rather than international examples.
Someone might be offended by the racism in the play Othello as well.
Just something to think about.
It's always safest to use some common, bland, industry-standard scenario...boring, but safe.

. In Studio, drag the *Validate schema* operation to your flow.

> . In the *Schemas* field, add your schemas files and separate them with a comma, for example, `schema1.xsd, schema2.xsd`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. In the *Schemas* field, add your schema files, separating filenames by using a comma, for example, `schema1.xsd, schema2.xsd`.
```

. Drag a *Flow Reference* component to the right of the *Validate schema* operation.

> . Set the *Flow name* to `processValidDocument`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Set *Flow name* to `processValidDocument`.
```

.XML Module Validate schema configuration

> image::xml-validate-schema-1.png[In the Schemas field add the schema name files]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
image::xml-validate-schema-1.png[In the Schemas field, add the schema name files.]
```

</flow>
----

> In the following example, you configure the *Validate schema* operation where you supply your own input document:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the following example, you configure the *Validate schema* operation by supplying your own input:
```

. In Studio, drag the File *Read* operation to your flow.
. In the configuration screen, set the *File Path* field to `document.xml`.
. In the *Advanced* tab, set the *Target Variable* field to `xmlDoc`.
. Drag the XML module *Validate schema* operation to the right of the *Read* operation.

> . In the *Schemas* field, add your schemas and separate them with a comma, for example, `schema1.xsd, schema2.xsd`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. In the *Schemas* field, add your schemas and separate their names by using commas, for example, `schema1.xsd, schema2.xsd`.
```

. Set the *Content* field to the XML content to validate, for example, `#[vars.xmlDoc]`.
. Drag a *Flow Reference* component to the right of the *Validate schema* operation.
. Set the *Flow name* to `processValidDocument`.

.XML Module Validate schema configuration

> image::xml-validate-schema-2.png[In the Content field add XML content file to validate]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
image::xml-validate-schema-2.png[In the Content field, add the XML content file to validate.]
```

</flow>
----

== Manage the Validation Error

If the validation is successful, the flow continues to the next operation. However, if the validation fails, an `XML-MODULE:SCHEMA_NOT_HONOURED` error is raised. +

> Because the validation can fail for any number of reasons, the error description contains a list of messages. Each message contains a `SchemaViolation` object, that has the following structure:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because the validation can fail for more than one reason, the error description contains a list of messages. Each message contains a `SchemaViolation` object that has the following structure:
```

}
----

In the following example, you configure the *Validate schema* operation and the `XML-MODULE:SCHEMA_NOT_HONOURED` error in the Error Handler component:

. In Studio, drag the *Try* scope component to your flow.
. Drag the XML module *Validate schema* operation into the *Try* scope component.
. In the *Schemas* field, add your schema, for example, `schema.xsd`.

> . In your flow, click the *Error handling* arrow to expand the error handling section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. In your flow, click the *Error handling* arrow to expand the error-handling section.
```

. Drag a *For Each* scope component into the *On Error Propagate* component to iterate over each `errorMessage.payload`.
. Set the *Collection* field to the expression that splits the payload into individual pieces, for example, `#[error.errorMessage.payload]`.
. Drag a *Logger* component into the *For Each* scope component to log the XML module error.
. Set the *Message* field to the expression that contains the `SchemaViolation` objects that describe the message, for example, `#['At line: $(payload.lineNumber), column: $(payload.columnNumber) -> $(payload.description)']`.
. Save your changes.
. Click the project name in *Package Explorer* and then click *Run > Run As > Mule Application*.
. Navigate to the Console view to read the logger message:
+
```
ERROR 2018-02-16 14:35:45,722 [[MuleRuntime].cpuIntensive.01: [SchemaValidationTestCase#extractErrorsUsingExpressions].extractErrorsFromException.CPU_INTENSIVE @411e886b] org.mule.runtime.core.internal.processor.LoggerMessageProcessor: At line: -1, column: -1 -> cvc-complex-type.2.4.a: Invalid content was found starting with element 'fail'. One of '{used}' is expected.
```
.XML Module Manage validation error flow

> image::xml-validate-schema-3.png[The XML Module Manage validation error flow]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
image::xml-validate-schema-3.png[The XML module Manage Validation error flow]
```

In the XML editor, the `<on-error-propagate type="XML-MODULE:SCHEMA_NOT_HONOURED">` configuration looks like this:

[source,xml,linenums]
----
 <flow name="extractErrorsFromException">
    <try>
        <xml-module:validate-schema schemas="schema.xsd" />
        <error-handler>
            <on-error-propagate type="XML-MODULE:SCHEMA_NOT_HONOURED">
                <foreach collection="#[error.errorMessage.payload]">
                    <logger level="ERROR" message="#['At line: $(payload.lineNumber), column: $(payload.columnNumber) -> $(payload.description)']" />
                </foreach>
            </on-error-propagate>
        </error-handler>
    </try>
</flow>
----

> == Troubleshoot Validation Against a Schema Issues

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Troubleshoot Validation Against Schema Issues
```

When using the XML module to validate against a schema that has references to other local schema files, the validation can fail with the error:

```

> The supplied schemas were not valid. schema_reference: Failed to read schema document NMVS_Composite_Types.xsd, because file access is not allowed due to restriction set by the accessExternalSchema property

Reviewer 2: due to a restriction

Author: It seems, this is the entire error returned by the platform, but I'll reconfirm with the devs.

> The supplied schemas were not valid. schema_reference: Failed to read schema document NMVS_Composite_Types.xsd, because file access is not allowed due to restriction set by the accessExternalSchema property

Reviewer: I can't tell which part of this, if any, is system output, and the second sentence looks like a mixture?
Best guess:
```suggestion
The supplied schemas are not valid, because file access is not allowed due to restrictions set by the `accessExternalSchema` property.
```

Reviewer: Check how the sentence works with the following sentence.

```

This error occurs because the access was restricted in the XML module global element configuration by setting the *Expand entities* field to the default value of *NEVER*. This value prevents XXE (XML External Entity) and DoS (Denial of Service) attacks.

> To resolve this issue set the *Expand entities* field to *INTERNAL*:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To resolve this issue, set the *Expand entities* field to *INTERNAL*:
```

. In Studio, open your project and access your Mule app flow.
. Navigate to the *Global Element* tab.

> . Select the *XML Config* configuration, and click *Edit*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Select the *XML Config* configuration and click *Edit*.
```

> . In the *Global Element Properties* window, set *Expand entities* field to *INTERNAL*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. In the *Global Element Properties* window, set the *Expand entities* field to *INTERNAL*.
```

. Click *OK*.

.XML Module Global Configuration element

> image::xml-validate-schema-4.png[XML Module global configuration Expand entities field]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
image::xml-validate-schema-4.png[XML module global configuration Expand entities field]
```
